Developer Notes for Python Compiler
===================================

Parsing
-------

Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)
--------------------------

The abstract syntax tree (AST) is a high-level description of the
program structure with the syntactic details of the source text
removed.  It is specified using the Zephyr Abstract Syntax Definition
Language (ASDL) [Wang97]_.

The Python definition is found in the file ``Parser/Python.asdl``.

The definition describes the structure of statements, expressions, and
several specialized types, like list comprehensions and exception
handlers.  Most definitions in the AST correspond to a particular
source construct, like an if statement or an attribute lookup.  The
definition is independent of its realization in any particular
programming language.

The AST has concrete representations in Python and C.  There is also
representation as a byte stream, so that AST objects can be passed
between Python and C.  (ASDL calls this format the pickle format, but
I avoid that term to avoid confusion with Python pickles.)  Each
programming language has a generic representation for ASDL and a tool
to generate a code for a specific abstract syntax.

The following fragment of the Python abstract syntax demonstrates the
approach.

::

  module Python
  {
	stmt = FunctionDef(identifier name, arguments args, stmt* body)
	      | Return(expr? value) | Yield(expr value)
	      attributes (int lineno)
  }

The preceding example describes three different kinds of statements --
a function definition and return and yield statement.  The function
definition has three arguments -- its name, its argument list, and
zero or more statements that make up its body.  The return statement
has an optional expression that is the return value.  The yield
statement requires an expression.

The statement definitions above generate the following C structure
type.

::

  typedef struct _stmt *stmt_ty;

  struct _stmt {
        enum { FunctionDef_kind=1, Return_kind=2, Yield_kind=3 } kind;
        union {
                struct {
                        identifier name;
                        arguments_ty args;
                        asdl_seq *body;
                } FunctionDef;
                
                struct {
                        expr_ty value;
                } Return;
                
                struct {
                        expr_ty value;
                } Yield;
        } v;
        int lineno;
   }

It also generates a series of constructor functions that generate a
``stmt_ty`` with the appropriate initialization.  The ``kind`` field
specifies which component of the union is initialized.  The
``FunctionDef`` C function sets ``kind`` to ``FunctionDef_kind`` and
initializes the ``name``, ``args``, and ``body`` fields.

The parser generates a concrete syntax tree represented by a ``node
*`` defined in ``Include/node.h``.  The abstract syntax is generated
from the concrete syntax in ``Python/ast.c`` using the function::

    mod_ty PyAST_FromNode(const node *n);

Code Generation and Basic Blocks
--------------------------------

XXX Describe the structure of the code generator, the types involved,
and the helper functions and macros.

Code Objects
------------

XXX Describe Python code objects.

.. [Wang97]  Daniel C. Wang, Andrew W. Appel, Jeff L. Korn, and Chris
   S. Serra.  `The Zephyr Abstract Syntax Description Language.`_
   In Proceedings of the Conference on Domain-Specific Languages, pp.
   213--227, 1997.

.. _The Zephyr Abstract Syntax Description Language.:
   http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~danwang/Papers/dsl97/dsl97-abstract.html.
