Doc/library/_ast.rst, before:

.. _ast:

Abstract Syntax Trees
=====================

.. module:: _ast
   :synopsis: Abstract Syntax Tree classes.

.. sectionauthor:: Martin v. Löwis <martin@v.loewis.de>


.. versionadded:: 2.5

The ``_ast`` module helps Python applications to process trees of the Python
abstract syntax grammar. The Python compiler currently provides read-only access
to such trees, meaning that applications can only create a tree for a given
piece of Python source code; generating :term:`bytecode` from a (potentially modified)
tree is not supported. The abstract syntax itself might change with each Python
release; this module helps to find out programmatically what the current grammar
looks like.

An abstract syntax tree can be generated by passing ``_ast.PyCF_ONLY_AST`` as a
flag to the :func:`compile` builtin function. The result will be a tree of
objects whose classes all inherit from ``_ast.AST``.

The actual classes are derived from the ``Parser/Python.asdl`` file, which is
reproduced below. There is one class defined for each left-hand side symbol in
the abstract grammar (for example, ``_ast.stmt`` or ``_ast.expr``). In addition,
there is one class defined for each constructor on the right-hand side; these
classes inherit from the classes for the left-hand side trees. For example,
``_ast.BinOp`` inherits from ``_ast.expr``. For production rules with
alternatives (aka "sums"), the left-hand side class is abstract: only instances
of specific constructor nodes are ever created.

Each concrete class has an attribute ``_fields`` which gives the names of all
child nodes.

Each instance of a concrete class has one attribute for each child node, of the
type as defined in the grammar. For example, ``_ast.BinOp`` instances have an
attribute ``left`` of type ``_ast.expr``.   Instances of ``_ast.expr`` and
``_ast.stmt`` subclasses also have lineno and col_offset attributes.  The lineno
is the line number of source text (1 indexed so the first line is line 1) and
the col_offset is the utf8 byte offset of the first token that generated the
node.  The utf8 offset is recorded because the parser uses utf8  internally.

If these attributes are marked as optional in the grammar (using a question
mark), the value might be ``None``. If the attributes can have zero-or-more
values (marked with an asterisk), the values are represented as Python lists.


Abstract Grammar
----------------

The module defines a string constant ``__version__`` which is the decimal
subversion revision number of the file shown below.

The abstract grammar is currently defined as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../../Parser/Python.asdl

Commit message:

Patch #1810 by Thomas Lee, reviewed by myself: allow compiling Python AST objects into code objects in compile().
git-svn-id: http://svn.python.org/projects/python/trunk@62004 6015fed2-1504-0410-9fe1-9d1591cc4771

Doc/library/_ast.rst, after:

.. _ast:

Abstract Syntax Trees
=====================

.. module:: _ast
   :synopsis: Abstract Syntax Tree classes.

.. sectionauthor:: Martin v. Löwis <martin@v.loewis.de>


.. versionadded:: 2.5

The ``_ast`` module helps Python applications to process trees of the Python
abstract syntax grammar.  The abstract syntax itself might change with each
Python release; this module helps to find out programmatically what the current
grammar looks like.

An abstract syntax tree can be generated by passing :data:`_ast.PyCF_ONLY_AST`
as a flag to the :func:`compile` builtin function. The result will be a tree of
objects whose classes all inherit from :class:`_ast.AST`.

A modified abstract syntax tree can be compiled into a Python code object using
the built-in :func:`compile` function.

The actual classes are derived from the ``Parser/Python.asdl`` file, which is
reproduced below. There is one class defined for each left-hand side symbol in
the abstract grammar (for example, ``_ast.stmt`` or ``_ast.expr``). In addition,
there is one class defined for each constructor on the right-hand side; these
classes inherit from the classes for the left-hand side trees. For example,
``_ast.BinOp`` inherits from ``_ast.expr``. For production rules with
alternatives (aka "sums"), the left-hand side class is abstract: only instances
of specific constructor nodes are ever created.

Each concrete class has an attribute ``_fields`` which gives the names of all
child nodes.

Each instance of a concrete class has one attribute for each child node, of the
type as defined in the grammar. For example, ``_ast.BinOp`` instances have an
attribute ``left`` of type ``_ast.expr``.   Instances of ``_ast.expr`` and
``_ast.stmt`` subclasses also have lineno and col_offset attributes.  The lineno
is the line number of source text (1 indexed so the first line is line 1) and
the col_offset is the utf8 byte offset of the first token that generated the
node.  The utf8 offset is recorded because the parser uses utf8 internally.

If these attributes are marked as optional in the grammar (using a question
mark), the value might be ``None``. If the attributes can have zero-or-more
values (marked with an asterisk), the values are represented as Python lists.

The constructors of all ``_ast`` classes don't take arguments; instead, if you
create instances, you must assign the required attributes separately.


Abstract Grammar
----------------

The module defines a string constant ``__version__`` which is the decimal
subversion revision number of the file shown below.

The abstract grammar is currently defined as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../../Parser/Python.asdl
